---
title: Still more modules and informational quantum mechanics
author: jorys
date: 2025-08-20
hours: "5 hours"
topics:
  - Commutative Algebra
  - Quantum Mechanics
  - Mathematical Theory of Information

---



Today I continued my steady progress on modules; it is the first time I find it hard to progress through a mathematical textbook. I am used to read 10-15 pages/hour doing any reflection or calculation needed in my head; applying the same method here makes me advance at 1-3 pages/hour and I xannot understand the bigger picture...

To free my mind and think about something else I watched a lecture on [_Des questions d'Einstein aux qubits : la seconde révolution quantique_](https://youtu.be/LQVxudyvB5o?si=QO4dMf8g0hWBRyq9) by Professor Alain Aspect; I did not learn much new information but this watching was still useful at many levels. Firstly I didn't remember that his experiment on Bell's inequalities was infirming the theory of **local** hidden variables. I then went on to search about some theories on _global_ hidden variables and found not much convincing theories until I discovered the _informational interpretation of quantum mechanics_. In this interpretation, quantum mechanics isn't understood as a theory of the physical reality but as a theory of how we observe it. In fact the wavefunction is here seen as an information storage device encoding the information an observer has on the possible outcome of a measurement. The quantum measurement problem is then  
an update of information (see Quantum Bayesianism or QBism), entanglement is the correlation between the information we have on multiple systems and reflects fundamental limits on how much information can be simultaneously extracted about complementary properties. This interpretation _dissolves_ the fundamental structural problems of quantum mechanics. Also, viewing information as the foundational building block of physical reality we might be able to derive Einstein's field equations from quantum information (holography principle, emergence from entanglement, ER = EPR, etc.) to find a _unified theory of physics_.

One can notice that we used here very _Grothendickian_ metaphores, potentially hinting at a Grothendickian program for theoretical physics, or at least at the potential usefulness of his philosophy and method in the resolution of the biggest challenges of modern physics... He himself wrote about his views on a uified theory for physics in the note 71 of the introduction of [_Récoltes et semailles_](https://web.ma.utexas.edu/users/slaoui/notes/recoltes_et_semailles.pdf).

---
**Resources:**
* [Atiyah-MacDonald Ch. 2 §5 - 7](https://webhomes.maths.ed.ac.uk/~v1ranick/papers/atiyahmacdonald.pdf)
* [_Des questions d'Einstein aux qubits : la seconde révolution quantique_](https://youtu.be/LQVxudyvB5o?si=QO4dMf8g0hWBRyq9)
