---
title: A first glimpse into category theory and information-as-morphims
author: jorys
date: 2025-08-18
hours: "5 hours"
topics:
  - Category Theory
  - Mathematical Theory of Information

---

As planned yesterday, I started to dive into category theory today. It was something I had planned to do for long but I didn't have the sufficient mathematical maturity yet, which I have now. I planned to do it a bit later in my reading schedule but my struggle on modules within the realms of commutative algebra made me try this new categorical approach. 
As I expected from what I understood of category theory through low-level expositions, this relationship-directed view of mathematics is challenging but very elegant and I like the work m ymind has to do to get things right. I believe that the most improtant thing to understand when starting category theory is that **a morphism of a category (an arrow) is not necessarily a map between objects of this category**. 
For example, a group $G$ is a category with one element which can be anything --say $\emptyset$-- and which mrophisms are the elements of $G$. It is clear that the mrophims here can not be some sort of map between the empty set and itself... still this category verifies the axioms of a category and does define a group given that we enforce that each morphism must have an inverse (ie. a morphism such that the left and right composition with it gives the identity morphism on $\empty$). 

Also, seeing things with diagrams I went on to understand what a tensor product of modules was. This understanding is still only conceptual so I couldn't explain it well (and motivate the need for the notion) as of now, but it is very promising.

Finally, this conceptual dive into category theory made me think of information as morphisms between the objects of the physical universe: it conceptually makes a lot of sense but the framework needs to be developped, as I will try to do once I will be done with MacLane's book.


---
**Resources:**
* [MacLane Ch. 1 ยง1 - 2](https://math.mit.edu/~hrm/palestine/maclane-categories.pdf)
* [Richard E Borcherds - Categories 1 Introduction](https://youtu.be/JOp7mH72Jlg?si=y0QSMDMQuOcNZfqP)
