---
title: Topological vector Spaces, Modules, and metamathematics
author: jorys
date: 2025-08-18
hours: "3 hours"
topics:
  - General Topology
  - Commutative Algebra
  - Topological Vector Spaces
  - Modules

---

Continuing my self-study of general topology (Jänich) and commutative algebra (Atiyah-MacDonald & Professor Borcherd's YouTube series backed by Eisenbud's *Commutative Algebra with a View Toward Algebraic Geometry*) before diving into homological algebra, algebraic topology and sheaf theory (to finally discover the math behind the poetic term of *cohomology*, among other things) through the careful reading of Godement's *Topologie algébrique et théorie des faisceaux*.


Today I couldn't work as much as I would have wanted due to fatigue so I only manage to start Aitayah-MacDonald's Chapter 2 on modules and read Jänich's Chapter 2 on Topological Vector Spaces. I struggled a bit with the notion of direct sum and specifically with the following statement:

Given a module decomposition
$$
A = \mathfrak{a}_1 \oplus \cdots \oplus \mathfrak{a}_n
$$

of $A$ as a direct sum of ideals, we have

$$
A \cong \prod_{i=1}^{n} (A/\mathfrak{b}_i)
$$

where $\mathfrak{b}_i = \bigoplus_{j \neq i} \mathfrak{a}_j$. Each ideal $\mathfrak{a}_i$ is a ring (isomorphic to $A/\mathfrak{b}_i$). 

The identity element $e_i$ of $\mathfrak{a}_i$ is an idempotent in $A$, and $\mathfrak{a}_i = (e_i)$.




I can see it operation-wise but it is harder to get it dealing with the spaces directly. I will keep this result in the back of my head to finally get it.

I also watched a conference by Professor Alain Connes at *Collège de France* in 2018 on [Langage mathématique](https://youtu.be/zmT8MHMIOLg?si=tUQXs9NJfG1vEetI) as part of my current metamathematical reflection on the nature of mathematical reality. It was really instructive and made me reconsider the importance of the notion of spectrum in mathematics at an even higher level than I already did. It also made me discover the *Lincos* by Hans Freundenthal which I aim to at least read the introduction sometime in the following weeks.


---
**Resources:**
* Jänich Ch. 2
* [Atiyah-MacDonald Ch. 2 §1 - 4](https://webhomes.maths.ed.ac.uk/~v1ranick/papers/atiyahmacdonald.pdf)
* [Langage mathématique](https://youtu.be/zmT8MHMIOLg?si=tUQXs9NJfG1vEetI)

