---
title: An overdose of modules and a shift towards category theory
author: jorys
date: 2025-08-21
hours: "5 hours"
topics:
  - Commutative Algebra
  - Quantum Mechanics
  - Mathematical Theory of Information

---



Today I could finally end Atiyah-MacDonald's Chapter 2 but it was hard and I didn't have enough mental freshness to follow the last sections properly given that my mind was still battling with results dealing with exact sequences and tensor products... I had a reassuring conversation with my friend Yohan though, who did a _CPGE MP*_ at _Lycée Marcelin Berthelot_ (one of the best undergraduate programs in math in France) and then graduated valedictorian at _Université Paris-Est Créteil_ the year before me, before starting his master's at _Sorbonne Université_ where he prepared the _agrégation de mathématique_ to which he succeeded. He is now preparing a PhD in mathematics and was working through his master's course on commutative algebra again when I told him about my issues with the topic; he reassured me that it was complicated for him too given the high load of information that each proof carries. This discussion along with the author's remark that results on exact sequences could be seen as results on functors relative to some categories, made me realize that I might benefit from another point of view on commutative algebra. In fact I believe to have some sort of geometric intuition and not so much about algebra, but categories seem to work well with my mind from the few I could see of it up to now; so I chose to directly dive into catehory theory right now and go back to commutative algebra later with a categorical perspective. For this, I will use MacLane's book which is the reference in the field.

Also, I watched another lecture by Professor Pierre Deligne today, this time on [_La notion d'espace en mathématique_](https://youtu.be/QBw08ns37wY?si=_CzjhUCSP6Ap9XYY) which took me from Euclid to Grothendieck. I was really tired though so I will rewatch it with fresh eyes to get more of it.

---
**Resources:**
* [Atiyah-MacDonald Ch. 2 §7 - 11](https://webhomes.maths.ed.ac.uk/~v1ranick/papers/atiyahmacdonald.pdf)
* [_La notion d'espace en mathématique_](https://youtu.be/QBw08ns37wY?si=_CzjhUCSP6Ap9XYY)
